[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Hey, I'm Ashleigh Sergeant,
and welcome to "Everyday
Enlightenment."
This is your go-to show
that offers practical tips
from expert guests at the
end of every episode designed
to help you be more
conscious in the midst
of your busy modern life.
Studies show that
loneliness increases
the risk of early death by 45%
and the chance of developing
dementia later in
life by almost 64%.
Loneliness is also the
psychological state
most associated with
suicide, to the point where
it's safe to say that, while not
all lonely people are suicidal,
all suicidal people are lonely.
My guest today is Meg McCracken.
Together, Meg and I founded
the Alaya Yoga School.
One of the most
compassionate humans
I know, Meg is passionate about
making the teachings of yoga
available and accessible
to absolutely everyone,
including physically, racially,
economically, and religiously
diverse communities.
Her current desire
is to reach those
that our current societal
structure has left behind,
including the homeless
and prison inmates.
Meg, thanks so much for
being here with me today.
>> Oh, Ash, thanks
for having me.
It's always such a
joy to be with you.
>> These statistics
are wild, right?
I don't think we're
actually realizing
how much effect this
concept of being lonely
is having on our health.
>> It's a pervasive issue.
I think I'd be willing to
say it is the pervasive issue
of our times.
And it is underlying
so many of the issues
that we're facing
in this world today.
And even just in my time
for over a decade working
one-on-one with
people through yoga,
I've found that a lot
of people were coming
with different kinds of things.
But underlying all of it
was a sense of loneliness.
And what was most
effective in our work
together was not so
much what we did,
but it was more about the
connection that we made
and who we became along the way.
It was really tremendous to see
how loneliness can affect us
physically, mentally,
emotionally, spiritually
and how connection can
help to heal that divide.
It's just incredible.
>> Yeah.
Let's talk a little
bit more about,
how do you, in your
experience, define
this concept of loneliness?
Because it's my hunch that it's
really manifesting for people
actually in very different ways
that maybe we don't normally
think of as being
lonely, which is
why it's becoming so pervasive.
>> Yeah.
Well, and I think that something
that you're pointing to here--
and that's really,
really important
to know-- is that there can
be somebody that is surrounded
by a lot of people, or maybe
by a family, or what have you.
And that doesn't necessarily
mean that they're not lonely.
And then, there are people
who are alone a lot that
are not necessarily lonely.
Do you know?
And so I think maybe one of the
loneliest places in the cosmos
is actually within a
relationship or a group
of people and feeling unseen,
feeling unheard, feeling
unworthy, unaccepted.
That's where people really are
feeling lonely, when they maybe
are in a relationship or
even in a group of people
but the truth of who
they are as a human,
and as a divine being
even, is not acknowledged.
Or somehow, they feel separate.
Or I want to say that there
is a deep sense of inadequacy
that people seem
to have in this.
>> "I'm not good enough"
is present for just about
everyone.
>> Yeah.
And so they can't show up fully.
And in fact, a lot of people are
in this throes of inadequacy,
and so they don't really
feel comfortable expressing
the truth of who they are.
And that is a really dangerous
place for us as humans.
>> We feel maybe afraid
to express our anger,
or afraid to
express our sadness,
or afraid to express some of
these emotions sometimes that
we feel that other people
won't be able to accept.
>> Well, to be sure.
>> And then, we
don't express them.
>> Well, and we
We don't express any of those
kinds of things because we feel
like we're going to be
shunned out, and yeah,
and all of these
difficult emotions.
They're not even bad emotions.
I think we need to
get away from the idea
that there's certain
emotions that are good
and certain emotions
that are bad.
These are just
difficult emotions.
And so we can't
express those kinds
of emotions, which then puts
us in a place of isolation
with those emotions.
And it's really,
really interesting
because, let's say, a lonely
person has some sort of sadness
or some sort of anger
or some sort of fear.
And they will move into
perhaps the state of shame
because they feel
really isolated
in their experience of that.
And then, that anger, that
fear, that whatever it is,
and that sense of isolation
and that sense of shame
starts to eat at
them physically,
mentally, emotionally.
And they experience it to
be something that is theirs
and theirs alone,
when in actuality it's
a perfectly human experience.
And the pain that they're
calling their pain--
be it sadness, fear, anger, or
whatever-- is not their pain.
It is the pain of
human existence.
It's just the pain
of being human.
And so a connected
person might notice
what that's like and just
go, like, oh, right, here's
the experience of sadness.
And they might be more
willing to reach out
and not shunned from
the whole group.
>> So what is-- you know,
we talk about this a lot.
And I know this is a really
deep passion of yours.
But what does it really
mean to be connected
and to create connection?
Because just like
you specified--
especially in a
world today where
we're so connected
on social media,
we have all these
cellular devices--
it's actually quite easy to
be surrounded by community,
or surrounded by
a lot of people,
or in very busy atmospheres
and to have community.
But what's the difference
between a community
that actually is helping to
foster this real connection?
And how do people kind of get
into these spaces of feeling
so lonely, when
maybe otherwise it
looks like they're surrounded
by community or a lot of people?
>> Yeah.
So there's a few
things that I want
to pull on that you are
talking about in there.
First of all,
connection, and what
does that look like
versus loneliness?
And I think that connection is
a much more intimate experience
of ourselves and others and
reality and our world as it is.
It's an intimate experience.
And I think that this is an
important piece to point out,
is that loneliness and
connection are experiences,
are the way that
we experience life.
And so as somebody
who's more lonely
is experiencing life more from
a space of deep separation
and deep inadequacy, people
who are more connected
tend to experience
the truth of who
they are and their
interconnection
with the world around them.
And just going back to
what we were talking
about as far as even just
that little example of,
it's my sadness, or it's
the sadness of being human.
And so that's a big
differentiating factor
of somebody who might
be feeling lonely
or somebody who might
be feeling connected.
So it's this true intimacy
with our experiences,
with ourselves, and with
another human being.
And then, also in
there you were talking
about how we have all of these
social media devices and all
these ways to get connected.
And yes, we can
get really intimate
with the conversations that
are on the social media and all
that kind of thing.
But really, I feel like
it boils down to presence.
And yeah, and physical presence
for sure helps for sure.
But I know if I'm feeling
isolated or lonely,
yes, I can call my sister,
these kinds of things.
Or you can, yes, write an
email, that kind of thing.
But presence is the bridge that
takes the concept of connection
and actually brings it
into our lived experience.
So we have these concepts
of what it is to be lonely
and these ideas of how
to get out of loneliness.
And we have these
ideas of connection.
And even as yoga
teachers and meditation
teachers and
spiritual guides, we
talk about how
it's all connected.
And people understand that
to some degree up here.
>> Cognitively.
>> Yeah, absolutely.
But it is not their
experience of life.
They can think that, oh,
right, it's all connected,
and even have this
understanding about it up here.
But is absolutely not
their experience of life.
And presence is the
thing that bridges
the gap between a conceptualized
experience of connection
and the actual lived
experience and what
it means to be fully curious.
>> How do you define presence?
>> Well, yeah, this is
a really good point.
I mean, when I talk about
presence in this way,
there's a few different things
that I want to highlight here.
It's first being
completely available
to ourselves, each
other, and the moment
as it is without
having to try to fix it
or without having
to try to change it,
just being completely
open and available,
which is scary in these times.
>> Really listening without
trying to plan your reaction
before the person
is finished talking.
>> It's so true.
It's so true.
And just being completely
available to that,
even if it's not something
that you really like.
And when we're in that state
of availability to ourselves
and our state and the
person sitting next to us
and the experience
that's surrounding us,
what it tends to do is, it
starts to-- and especially when
we can be available in a
very open and accepting way--
it starts to open us up.
And this is the next
thing that I really
think is important-- curiosity.
And so you have this
open availability.
And then, you move into
a state of curiosity,
where you start to ask yourself
bigger questions of yourself,
start to ask other
people bigger questions.
You start to investigate
the experience
in a more intimate way versus
just staying at the surface
level of things, which starts
to bring us into a deeper
state of connection.
And then, through
that curiosity starts
to come a more rich
understanding of what
it means to be human, of
what it means to be divine
or a piece of something more.
So I'd love to give you an
example, just a real life
example.
Because a lot of that can
sound really, really great
but not super practical.
So for example, my daughter
and I were just on a trip.
And she was acting
up quite a lot.
And if I was feeling a
little bit more drained
and a little bit
more separate, I
would have just probably
acted up back at her.
You know what I mean?
And then, we'd be
on this road trip
in the car in a very frazzled
and isolating kind of way,
right?
We probably would've
yelled at each other
and then gone into our corners.
But moving through the realm
of presence, which does take--
and maybe we can get to
this in a moment-- it
does take a certain amount
of energy, vital energy.
So I have to be well rested.
I have to be well nourished
and that sort of thing
so I can at least deal.
And so that's kind of the
primary step to presence
anyway.
But then, moving
through in this way,
I was able to just kind
of stop and receive
the tantrum from my
daughter just as it was
without having to change it.
I could really feel into myself.
I was available
to the sensations
that it was kind of
bringing up in me.
The thoughts and the worries
and all of that kind of thing
that it was bringing
up in me, I was
just available to all of that.
And then, I started
getting curious
with myself and with her.
Like, hey, Lil, what's
really going on here?
How are you feeling right now?
And asked her where does
she feel it in her body.
Sometimes she doesn't,
doesn't want to talk about it.
She's eight.
And she's like, Mom, I don't
want to talk about that.
But then, once I start
asking some bigger
questions, like, "how
are you feeling?"
or "is there anything that
you're worried about right
now?" or things like
this that elicit her
into some sort of
response, then I
start to understand that she's
just not been sleeping well
because we've been on the road.
She's out of her routine.
And I have not
been sleeping well
because we were on the road.
I've been out of my routine.
I can start to understand
these threads of things
that connect us.
And then, we start to have
a completely different
conversation.
And she starts to recognize
that she can lean in on me.
And then, I can also ask
questions and lean in on her.
And now, we're a lot closer in
our relationship versus much
further apart.
Does that make sense?
Does that resonate?
>> Well, for sure.
And I think the
biggest thing that's
standing out for me on this
is, when you say curiosity,
it's not trying to fix.
Because I think,
in my experience,
that when someone comes at me--
or when I certainly do this
to other people-- with,
oh, I have the answer.
Just tell me how you're
feeling, and I can tell you
why you shouldn't be
feeling that way, how
you can feel differently.
That can immediately feel
very isolating, as opposed to,
you ask these questions.
And then, you both
have the capacity
to go, oh my god, yeah,
I'm feeling that same way.
Oh, I'm feeling the same way.
And then, you're in a much
deeper level of connection.
>> Yeah.
And the curiosity does,
it has to be rooted
in the want to understand.
I mean, Thich Nhat Hanh,
I believe, talks about,
like, please help
me to understand
the nature of your suffering.
And that's the
intent behind it when
we're trying to get curious--
in our own selves too.
When we're exploring our
own store of angst or hurt
or some of these
difficult emotions,
we go, oh, right, let me
understand this more deeply.
And then, I work at
it with my daughter
or with somebody that's
across the divide
politically from me or any
of the divides that we face.
Please help me to
understand more.
And then, I just listen.
And that's the thing that's
really, really important,
is to open up the
curiosity and then
sit back and listen and make
yourself available again
and again and again and again.
>> Well, this
topic is essential.
And it could be a
whole other show.
I know it's really
passionate for you.
But particularly about
reaching across these
divides that we've created
politically, socially, racially
in our country and in
the world, that actually
taking this concept of presence
as a way to create connection
instead of fueling
that fire of isolation.
>> Yeah.
And it's really
interesting right now
because I see some of
these divides in the world.
And I see the divides
as a cry for connection.
Because if I'm on this side
and you're on that side,
I belong somewhere, don't I?
And that's connection.
But in that connection,
there has to be an us
and there has to be at them.
And we never start to
work to bridge the divide.
But I see underlying in the
seed of want there that people
really want connection.
And this is an important
thing that I want to bring up.
And this is from the work
of John Cacioppo, who
unfortunately passed
away this spring.
But he was a social
neuroscientist
at the University of Chicago.
And he's done lots of studies
on the disease of loneliness
and these kinds of things.
But what he was
starting to find is
that loneliness is
less like an emotion
and more like a
survival response,
much more akin to
hunger and thirst
than it is to just some sort of
irrational emotional response,
let's say.
And so it's because we
are social creatures.
And as humans, we
need our communities
in order to actually survive.
We don't have the sharpest
claws or the sharpest teeth,
and we don't run the fastest.
And tied up in our survival
mechanism is community.
And so if we are
feeling lonely, it's
like an urge like hunger
that's saying eat.
When we're feeling
lonely, it's an urge
like that that's saying connect.
You are on the fringes here.
And if we don't connect, our
survival instinct kicks in.
Fight, flight, freeze kicks in.
That suppresses
our immune system.
I mean, there's a
whole host of things
that go along down that line.
So as we're working
to mend the divides,
to just recognize what's driving
the divide in the first place.
It might not be so
much our opinions.
Yes, that has to do with it.
But also, we're not going
to make any radical changes
unless we go at it
with, like, please help
me to understand what's
the root of this,
what's the source of this.
And it's there in the
source that we can connect.
On the surface, not so much.
We'll just yell and scream
at each other all day long.
And we'll get more
fearful because we're
going to get more to the
fringes as we keep going along.
And our society is not
going to survive it.
>> So Meg, what are a couple
of tips that you would give
to someone who is feeling
lonely or feeling isolated?
What can they do?
>> Yeah.
Yeah, so a couple of things.
One thing that I think
is really vitally
important for those who
are feeling really lonely
is to acknowledge that
it does have a variety
of physiological effects.
But one of the things that
it does, and people might not
know this, is really affect
their sleep patterns.
And so a lot of people
who are feeling lonely
are also quite tired.
So just to take care of
their basic vital essence,
perhaps taking little naps
and enriching themselves.
Well, that's one thing.
But I would also say that it
is like the cry for hunger.
And so when you're hungry,
you need to go eat.
And the loneliness is not
something that's shameful.
So that's something that
they need to know about.
It's more like this
survival instinct.
And it's pointing them
back to the tribe,
pointing them back
to connection.
And the thing is, though,
they want to go to a place
where there's going to
be meaningful connection.
It's like we talked about at
the beginning of the program is
that just being around people
doesn't necessarily subside
this thing of loneliness.
So moving through the
world to find a place
of meaningful connection.
A lot of people that
I've worked with,
I find it's really helpful
if people find something
that they feel really passionate
about and go volunteer there.
Because there will be
threads of connection
already sort of in place.
Other people who are passionate
about the same things
will be there.
There will be something that's
easy to talk about with people
>> That's a great idea.
>> Yeah.
So just going out
and volunteering
can be really great, or
even joining a book club.
Sometimes when we're feeling
lonely, we also feel--
not always-- but sometimes
we feel socially awkward
moving back into a situation.
So if you have
something that's like,
oh we're talking about that
book and how it affects me,
then it's going to
give you the framework
for that meaningful
connection to happen.
So those are two things that
I would say would be great.
>> --and super practical.
Can you give the viewers and
the audience a practice or a tip
around how to work
on cultivating
this quality of
presence in order
to be able to create
deeper connection?
>> Absolutely, absolutely.
I'd love to offer you guys
a little meditation that
helps to cultivate presence.
So wherever you are, please
just sit up nice and tall.
And just like me, you
can sit in a chair,
or you can sit on the floor.
Allow your spine to be uplifted,
and let your eyes fall closed.
Relax your jaw.
And allow the seed
of your awareness
to slip from the head space
and all of the mental doings.
And allow it to slip down
into the heart space.
And simply feel the sensation of
breathing as it rises and falls
in your chest.
Just starting to build presence
in the space of the heart.
Allow the fullness
of your awareness
to rest on the sensation of
breathing there in the chest,
in the space of the heart.
And just see what it's
like to experience life
from the space of the heart by
simply noticing any sounds that
arise in the field
of your awareness
as you continue to
breathe in and out
of the space of your heart.
Just allowing all
sounds to settle
in the space of the heart.
Acknowledging these
not only as the sounds
that you hear but simply as
the sound of life itself.
And continuing to breathe in and
out of the space of the heart.
Now, welcome into the
vastness of your heart
any sensations that you might
have in your body right now.
Welcoming these
sensations into a heart
that is wide enough to hold them
all and infinitely more vast
just being with the sensations
of having a human body.
Now, welcoming into
the space of the heart
any thoughts or emotions
that are present for you now.
An intimate allowing of
the thoughts and emotions
of humanity into the
space of your heart.
And now, one more time,
shifting awareness
to the vastness itself that
holds and embraces it all.
Experiencing the
fullness of yourself
in this moment from
the space of the heart,
allow your eyes to open.
And you can move
on about your day,
hopefully taking a thread
of this experience with you.
Knowing that, at any
moment throughout the day,
you can simply put
your hand on your heart
and take a deep breath
in and a slow breath out
and allow that to draw you
back into a state of allowing
an open presence,
and then allowing
you to move into a
state of curiosity.
>> Meg, thank you so much for
that practice-- so helpful.
And really, anyone
can use that as a way
to start to cultivate connection
with their deeper self
and with anyone else
in the world, right?
>> Yeah.
Oh, absolutely.
I mean, this is a meditation
I do all the time.
And it helps me, like you
said, to connect with myself.
But it also helps my capacity
to connect with those around me
for sure.
Yeah, yeah.
>>, Well thank you so
much for being here.
It's great to have you.
>> Oh, it's so
wonderful to be here.
Thank you so much for having me.
Yeah.
>> Thanks for joining us.
I will see you next time.
[MUSIC PLAYING]